---
title:  "Live to Fail, Fail to Live"
date:   2016-02-09
category: blog
permalink: /live-to-fail/
---

So a coupla light bulbs just went on recently, regarding my middle-aged career switch: 

1. I’m entering — or, rather, sidling into — a world that’s distinctly foreign to mine, at least as it’s taken shape over the past six or seven years.

2. I love learning to code. Every bit of it. Really love it. Might also really love coding, but I’m not sure I’m actually coding yet; all I’m sure about is that I’m still learning it. Maybe most of all when I’m dealing with something that, the first couple times I look at it, might as well be written in hieroglyphics for all the sense I can make of it — when there’s just absolutely nothing in my mental toolkit that’s gonna help me deal with it.

3. I know what I’m looking for now: some part of #1 that lets me keep on accessing #2. That means it has to be a job, but as for _what kind_ of job … I’m still a stem cell here. I hear tell of bootcamp students fixated on working for hot startups or the tech behemoths and I just don’t get it. I wanna go somewhere I can learn. I need a paycheck but, thank the Ladybeard, I don’t need a huge one right now. I just need more experience. My options might prove restricted in the end, but why limit them now? 

It’s just as I’m writing this that I realize it was just last week that all of this became clear to me. Strange week. Obviously a good one, but strange. After all, it’s February, the point of Earth’s orbit where time itself loses its structure and color. It arises to block your egress from home, it reaches up to swallow your feet when you step off the curb, it pulls down even the sky onto your head, and then at some point just evaporates, leaving a coat of grit over everything. At the equinox you can balance an egg gracefully on its point. In February, that egg just gets smashed into your face. Every day. And it’s rotten. 

Hell, the last time I tried to start something major and decided it didn’t matter that I was doing it in February, a snowstorm appeared out of nowhere and, but for some quick thinking on my part, woulda sucked me into a huge pileup or rolled me and my brother’s pickup into a ditch alongside I-70. 

And here I am having meaningful insights in February. Maybe I’m just asking for trouble. 

But starting on No. 3 — finding work, basically — seems pretty impossibly far off, which only makes the first two more surprising. And makes commemorating a good week all the more worth it. There’s plenty of despair still left out there. But I guess I discovered last week that there’s at least a floor to it. 

**Time Is Never On My Side**

Every time I step away for a minute from the daily stuff of learning to think about what I’m doing here, everything on my mind is shot through with time. Sometimes that’s a very positive thing: I feel like I escape time for a second whenever I get into a lab and have problems to solve, errors to decipher, bits of connective tissue to go Google (everyone else, it seems like, already has that stuff, but I gotta graft it on). That’s one of the signs that I’m on to something here that suits me somehow. That love might even be in the mix. 

But often it’s much more of a mixed bag. For one thing, stepping away from the daily stuff of learning to think about what I’m doing here winds up claiming its own share of time, and disrupts my rhythm. Especially right now, it helps to clear everything (even housework, cooking and social obligations), at least for awhile, so I can shovel as much of myself into this as possible, then sleep, then do it again. 

For another, it seems again like I’m doing everything bassackwards. Like I need to spend time meditating on things, because I’m usually missing something, a real humdinger, that I shoulda been aware of already. 

For example, the first thing that occurs to me after I realize the things above is, “well, yeah, all of this is … I mean, that’s the door you walked through. You couldn’t tell that you liked where it led until now?” And maybe I’d be better off if I could make my brain not work that way. But then I dunno, man; how’m I supposed to tell you what I think of the wallpaper before someone turns on the lights? 

If it’s something the size of a world — I use that term deliberately, instead of “culture,” because culture’s an inherently slippery term and when it comes to coding, I think there’s bound to be a few of them. Or, at the very least, layers of sub- mini- and microcultures. Uhhh, oh yeah: if it’s something the size of a world that I’m entering into, then I’m, at best, still at baggage claim. Maybe out front in the taxi line. Getting here took a minute, but I couldna told you much about what I thought about it until I did. 

Going along with this for a just a bit longer, I’d compare it to the first time I went to Bangkok in that even in the tax line, even with all the exhaust, there was something in the air that I got a whiff of — I experienced it as a literal scent, though it’s entirely possible it was something like synesthesia — that hooked me immediately, even if it took a coupla years before I actually liked Bangkok itself. 

And besides, when I say I love this, I’m not talking about any persistent set of feelings. It barely has to do with feelings at all, actually, for all my feels talk here. Those come in all sorts of different flavors and then vanish for days on end. And believe me, that’s gotten me into all sorts of trouble, especially with the Ladybeard, who apparently has a different understanding of the term. What I’m talking about is something else, and I don’t know for sure that’s what’s going on until I take a look at what I’ve been doing. 

Hell, maybe I’m wrong that it’s love — maybe it’s just some kind of infatuation. Maybe it’s a nascent addiction or some other kind of compulsive behavior. But I can’t quit it and don’t want to. Haven’t woken up yet, since I started getting serious about learning to code last September, and wanted to avoid even thinking about it. So that’s something. Might as well call it love. It feels like it, anyway. 

###**The Land of the Morning Tiger**

Which is where, normally, I’d bring up novel-writing. I think about it,  _a lot_, when I think about coding, for reasons I’ll belabor elsewhere. Maybe even in this post, I dunno — writing’s a form of thinking, so it’s a discovery process. I dunno where I’m going with this. I’m writing because I woke up with it on my mind and needed to figure it out. Which reminds me that I need a disclaimer somewhere so I don’t need to keep repeating that I’m writing this blog for my sake so you shouldn’t expect it to make, like, boatloads of sense.

Hmm, so I was … — oh yeah: this time around, realizing these things, I’m not actually thinking about writing. It all reminds me, actually, of moving to Korea. Which happened, oh my lord, more than a decade ago somehow. There’s time again. Hell, at one point in my life, I was hallucinating in a Korean ICU with something that looked a lot like SARS. The doctors summoned my parents from Indiana because it didn’t look like I was making it out. Sometimes it feels like I never did. But I marked the ten-year anniversary of that day … damn, nearly two years ago. 

But I also recently remembered a day, about four months into my first stint there, when I found myself laying in bed, swaddled in about four types of despair, and suddenly realized that I wasn’t drowning in it. It sure felt like I’d jumped from the frying pan into the fire. What I mean is, before I moved, I obviously wasn’t happy with how my life had been shaking out or I wouldn’t have taken the drastic step of going to Korea to teach English. (Or maybe that’s not obvious — there were plenty of people doing much the same thing I did but for very different reasons. But obviously, regardless of all this, I thought I’d find something better in Seoul than I’d found in Indianapolis.) But I hadn’t been driven to Korea and wasn’t fleeing anything; I used to take more pride than I should have in at least _not_ being one of the folks you’d encounter over there, doing the same thing you were doing, because they couldn’t hack it at home. That’s easy to explain: they made me uneasy because I’d be afraid that, hell, maybe I _am_ one of them. 

I’m digressing. I went to Korea because I was seeking something — some _things_, actually — that I couldn’t find in my previous life. It was all the more … I’ll settle for “difficult” to deal with that I couldn’t quite articulate them. At the time I had beef with the whole Midwest, and though I didn’t know exactly what I was looking for, I knew I couldn’t find it in Indy, and so probably laid more blame on the region than I should have. I got over that eventually. And, ultimately, I was never fleeing or being driven, I was being pulled by desire. 

So that day that brought all this up, whatever else I was feeling, it at least wasn’t homesickness. Hell, I considered myself, spiritually anyway, homeless for five more years after that. 

But I sure wasn’t getting any closer, or so it felt, to whatever it was I’d been dying to find. 

And I can’t say that I had no clue of how traveling abroad would affect me. Because that day in Seoul, I knew full well that I was experiencing a textbook case of culture shock, exactly on the schedule I’d read about before I even got on the plane. But experiencing something is radically different from knowing it’s out there or even knowing it’s coming. And the experience was what I wanted. If just knowing stuff’s out there was enough, or knowing how specific experiences have shaped specific people was enough to map the experiences into my memory, I woulda stayed put somewhere cheap enough to not have to work a ton and just spent my life reading. I could have lived several other people’s lives along with mine. I’ve always loved fiction because it does give you some approximation of this — there are times I think I’ve lived a few days in the skin of [Moses Herzog] (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Herzog_(novel)) — but still: it’s not the thing itself. 

That day, in June or July of 2003, I was up to my earballs in the thing itself. Struggling to remember why I’d been so hot for it. 

Maybe that’s what made it possible to click over, remembering reading about it so seeing the distance between that and living through it. I dunno. All I know is, I’m laying there in bed. It’s a Saturday, I think. It’s hot. I’m probably a little hungover. The city around me seems utterly shut to me. And I’m unable to move because this was my Hail Mary; I thought this was my only chance to ever find some happiness and I’m not happy at all and nothing’s getting better, so where can I go from here? 

I was gonna set the scene a bit more here, but every time I started getting into it, I started getting lost in the maze of despair that I’d woken up in that morning. I still think, as I was then, that if I’d been able to find someone, some kind of mentor maybe, the solutions woulda been pretty obvious. And I wish I’d started antidepressants then. Depression has a way of feeling utterly personalized to you. That’s part of the despair feedback, all the things about it that are specific to you — to what you want and are not getting, to what you’re trying to achieve but seem simply incapable of achieving (for me, that had to do with both the novel I was lost in the middle of writing then and the desire to avoid any of the corporate paths I’d already looked at and turned away from in favor of coming here). I was correct at the time in thinking that unhappines was a rational response to a lot of things going on in my life then. But I shoulda done more reading and taken a leap there rather than spending five more years setting all of those things right, one by one, only to find out I was still feeling much the same anomie and anhedonia. 

Anyway, it’s not worth going into my litany of despair that day. Just enough to point out that it had as much to do with how little progress I was making toward becoming someone I might at least not hate as with anything else. It had to do with a lot of character fails, is what I mean. I was responsible for a lot of that misery and I knew it and had no clue whatsoever about how to get out of it. 

And as it happens, that was the day I realized that not only _could_ I do this — whatever, exactly, “doing this” meant — but I _was currently doing it_. One of the few moments I can actually remember, quite clearly, when something that wasn’t my normal interior monologue said something intelligible to me. One of the few memories that doesn’t feel like the rest of them do — a reconstruction based as much on what things generally were like at the time as any specific recall of the events. And for the record, I _did_ say it _feels_ different than other memories. I know it probably isn’t any different. I know these things are instantiated upon recall like a Ruby object reassembled from a database table row. It just feels like an object that’s been fully-formed for awhile and was just brought out of storage. 

But anyway, that’s what happened. I’m laying there and something says to me it says, “I’m doing this.” Realized I was doing it reasonably well, too. Not doing anything superstar-level, whatever that would mean in this context. But I was doing it, and doing pretty well. I could get better, actually. I could do this. Nothing was fucked here, dude. 

Hell, I’d gotten comfortable moving around the city, I could read the language if not speak it very well, I got on well with my partner teacher and my students now exchanged inside jokes with me _in English_. 

Maybe the most important thing going on, which I didn’t realize at the time, was that I was also getting much better at communication. Since I was often speaking across the language barrier, I had to either give up conversation altogether or learn how to translate what I wanted to say into language my audience was already familiar with. And doing it in a way that didn’t sound like baby talk — the handful of five-year-olds I spent my mornings with might have tolerated that, but nobody else was going to. I eventually got particularly good at that. Came to love the language barrier, since it strips away any nonsense about subtext. Gets me in a bit of confusion now, since I still don’t use it. But it was good practice, learning to communicate that way.  

**Bedrock**

Now it was not, by any means, a happily-ever-after story from that point on. Hell, that aforementioned stint in ICU happened less than a year later, when I’d really begun flourishing. And there were plenty of other days that were plenty bad without almost killing me. But I left Korea in much better shape, by nearly all measures (I put on some weight working two full-time jobs for a year), and that low point, among all the low points, was the key moment that made that possible. There’d been a very real chance that I would return to Indiana, tail between my legs and life in another shambles. 

After that particular low point, I knew I was a person who does not do that. 

I mean give up before I have to. The life going to shambles, that’s not often gonna be entirely in my control, and if you don’t believe me, I’ll tell you about 2008. But I started getting a handle on controlling how I respond to things and knew I could take a decent amount of misery and keep going, should it happen again. It freed up a lot of resources that I could now devote to building something, rather than just holding on. 

And, over time, even the strangeness of the world I’d entered when I’d boarded the plane to Seoul faded quite a bit. I started seeing all the ways I could map those experiences onto who I’d been before and seeing how life took on similar shapes on either side of the Pacific. Koreans began seeming, in a lot of ways, a lot like Midwesterners with just a couple inputs switched here and there. Obviously there are things about it I just can’t share with anyone who hasn’t been there, and things about it I don’t know if I’ll ever be able to convey to another person. But over time, I started seeing the bridge from one to the other and it was something much larger than just that both worlds now existed within my one life. And because I went through it, I got a lot more determined not to accept the incommunicability of any experience without first trying to find different ways of communicating it. So it did make me a better writer after all. Obviously not a good enough one (remember when I had that hit novel?), but better. For now, I have to be content with just that. 

**The Pain is a Gift**

As hard as learning to code has been sometimes, it has been an order of magnitude easier than building a new life, just about from scratch, on the other side of the world (especially when you consider that I was so green that flying over there, age 24, was only my second-ever plane trip). 

The stakes are actually higher now — I’m pushing 40, I need a job, I got a long way to go just to break in — but it’s still much easier than making a go of it in Korea was for me. Eventually _that_ didn’t even look like all that big of a deal. All I’d really done was board a plane and not leave until my visa was up. Everything else, all the other struggles? They were just fighting with myself. 

But they relate, beyond the fact that I can and do draw on this memory when I have disheartening days. They’re both exercises in brain-stretching, and that’s the root cause of a lot of the pain. That’s the most important connection; and for both, the pain’s actually a sign that it’s working. 

The pain’s not the thing I like — it’s pain, c’mon — but I identifying what kind of pain it is, and where it’s coming from, that helped lead me to realizing that I’m loving this shit. It’s what I’ve been needing as I’ve stagnated over the past couple years without any idea of how to shake out of it. 

**You Don’t Have to Be Woz to Study Here, But It Helps**

But anyway, here’s what drove home point No. 1 up above: Me & the Ladybeard were having dinner with some friends of ours, who know me only as a writer and editor. One of our friends said learning to code must be radically different from writing and asked, at a different point, if there was something online that would tell me if I’d written the right code. I don’t remember which order they came in, but my enthusiasm for answering the second meant I couldn’t get much into explaining why the first was mistaken — I do much of the same mental work, actually, particularly when I try to explain what I’m trying to do in plain language so I can then do it in the right language.  

What happened was I set off red flags because the question about telling if my code was correct seemed like a perfect time to share my enthusiasm for TDD, so I started explaining rspec in very basic terms (hell, what others do I understand it in?). I coulda gone on for hours about all of it — but I only needed about five minutes of attention to produce a workable explanation of the what and why of rspec. 

Of course, nobody else at the table was in the mood for that. I let my enthusiasm drown out my EQ for a minute because I was with friends. One of them cut me off: “You’re dealing with a full-blown nerd!” he said to my fiancee. We all had a good laugh and it took me a minute to realize they’ve only ever known the suave, sophisticated, cultured-as-fuck me you see before you now. I’ve always known I was a nerd; it’s just seemed, for years now, as if I’d somehow backed into a form of nerddom that actually didn’t fit with any of the others — like I’m the nerd even among the nerds. Or maybe I’m a dilettante when it comes to the categories of nerddom. None of them has ever pulled on me enough to get me all the way down the rabbit hole. There’s always some interesting stuff over here. 

Except with Star Trek. You run out of interesting stuff there once you exhaust the parodies. 

But anyway, while that dinner made No. 2 all the clearer to me, it also made clear that No. 1’s, like everything, a pretty ambivalent thing. I’m sort of moving out of my world (not totally; I got a friend who’s a developer and another who got me into this because he had to learn Python for his research and thought I’d dig programming), but I’m not really in the other world, either. Even looking at the relevant Slack channels for L-V enforces this; I’m still just starting and spending all of my time and energy working out the basics of things like Ruby and a lot of my fellow students can offer informed commentary on the pros and cons of various frameworks, IDE setups, authentication issues and so on. 

So it’s intimidating. Hell, I compared it to being at baggage claim right now, but I might not have made it past Passport Control. This is when it’s crucial to remember that what’s really special about the web and about technology in general is that the only gatekeepers are in my own mind. I’m still out along the edges of this world, or maybe in some borderlands between it and what I knew before. But everything’s out there to be learned. It’s nice to remind myself of this sometimes. Maybe exhilarating for a minute. Then I remember there’s a lot of work to be done and time’s a-wasting.

##**Living Like a Refugee**

The more I learn about code, the more I need to be around others who know about it and are learning about it — partly for the sake of having people to share my enthusiasm with, and largely because I have so much still to learn, particularly about the _thing itself_ of working as a developer, however junior. But because I’m _not_ yet a developer — I’m not sure I’m even a writer anymore, I’m just a beginner, full-stop — and because of other things (my age, my background, my weird, weaving straggle through life thus far) that entails acculturating to wildly different ways of approaching even technology itself and its place in my life. 

I’m a foreigner all over again. 

But at least this time, I’m sure I’m in the right place, because of point No. 2 above. And that came out of about as much nowhere as humanly possible: around 6:30p.m., after a satisfactory (but by no means triumphant) day, about halfway through a beer on the eastern edge of Bed-Stuy, on a Tuesday, _in February_. Fast-forward two nights and I’m tryna spread the gospel and having to remind myself that learning to code is my whole world right now — but not _the_ whole world. 

Point is, I think I’m gonna be alright. Doesn’t always seem like it. I’m immersed in learning to code, and immersion feels like drowning from time to time. So it’s good to step away from it from time to time and realize that the immersion, or at least the disorienting fog, the complete incomprehensibility of things I encounter sometimes, is only temporary. I’m not sweeping away everything I learned before or all the skills I’ve acquired to this point in my life. 

That’s useful because, for all the time pressure I feel, for all the stupidity I lose days to, they pale in comparison to the biggest risk here: that I’ll complete all my exercises, land a gig, then prove wholly unworthy and get canned, and I’ll have nowhere to go from there. But I won’t let that happen. Enough time has passed since that day in Seoul that it’s pretty deeply embedded in me, this knowledge that I’m not someone who lets it come to that. 

And what’s more, I won’t have to trade just on my recently-acquired technical skills to land a job. 

That time back in Seoul, one thing that made it easier than what I’m dealing with now is that teaching in hagwons was, at least back then, frequently just a matter of window-dressing. They needed foreigners to trot out so they could charge eye-watering fees. That was the main value you provided to them, by and large, and any actual teaching ability you mustered was just icing on the gravy. You could be dead serious or you could be a washout who rarely showed up to work sober and you’d make the same salary and always have somewhere else to work if one place didn’t work out. 

After that one day early on, I focused a lot more on what was before me, improved my teaching, tended existing friendships and established new ones, and generally got better at navigating the world of ESL in Korea. It wasn’t a linear progression, I never got to superstar level, and I took a bit longer to get my shit together. But I did get it together. I got dissatisfied with most hagwon work, to the point where I eventually almost gave it up not because _I_ wasn’t good enough but because _the job_ wasn’t. But sticking it out for another year-plus, even after my near-death experience, put me in position to land a couple of excellent jobs later on for which I was much better-suited. I did ‘em both for awhile and when my last teaching contract was up, at the Korean equivalent of West Point, they wanted me back — and it would have been a comfortable life. I had a light teaching load at the university, plenty of time off, and plenty of income from the other one, writing textbooks. I had come to love Asia and wanted to explore it much more and was already on the right side of the Pacific for doing a lotta that. I’d even gotten some experience traveling in strange places and making out okay. 

I made the right decision pushing onward then, as much as I still miss Asia and would love to take the Ladybeard there some day (I barely scratched the surface, after all). I didn’t want to get comfortable just yet (that way lies senescence), I wanted to get somewhere peaceful and get writing. 

On the bad days, when I’m missing something so basic nobody understands that I’m actually asking the question I seem to be asking — how could I be at point X in the class and _not_ know this? — I sometimes remember that day back in Seoul. And I remember how many tough ones were still to come before things really settled into a groove. Hell, it took more than two more years of struggling before I was able to start doing any real travel, and another two beyond that before I finally reached the savings goals from my _first_ year there (ICU’s ain’t cheap, even in the middle of Seoul in a kind of crappy teaching hospital). 

There’s going to be a much higher bar to meet before I can even start the on-the-job learning part of web development. Which, as I understand it, involves learning on the job, forever. I certainly hope so, anyway. But I’ll have a lot more to offer than just some nascent coding skills. And at least github makes all kinds of intuitive sense to me, after years of being a one-man version-control system for an entire organization.  

So I need to gird my loins and get back to it. Hell, I just learned the hard way, just yesterday, that I need to read a lot more of the documentation for something new than I was used to. Just diving into the rspec and searching the documentation ain’t always gonna cut it. So I’m behind, so I guess I can leave off the pep talk for now. 

After all, I can write or I can learn to code but, for now, not both. That’s because time and energy are both zero-sum and writing and coding both devour them in similar ways. But that makes it easier to put aside the one vocation I ever thought I had while I try to find out if I have another: It’s not as if writing has ever been any easier, and my failures there are a lot more personal and, just, wow are they embarrassing. And I’d _still_ pour myself into it every damn day if I could get a good enough paycheck for it. But enough about those fails. I got some others to go make. 
