---
layout: default
title: "Working Bio"
date: 2016-12-20
category: bio
---

My name is Michael Nolan. I live in Brooklyn. I won't be blogging about the last thing; it's been written well to death already by the likes of me. But I will write, from time to time, about web development, which I've just begun learning. I'd update that sentence to reflect the fact that I'm over a year in, but I doubt it'll stop feeling like I've just begun--to say nothing of being still in the early stages--for a few more years yet. 

The short version of what this is about--well, hang on. This page, right here, is to fill in more detail about my work history and what I'm generally up to right now. 

Which, for the last year or so, has been almost exclusively, trying to stretch my brain around web development. 

I'm transitioning from a career as a writer and hyphenated editor (short of -in-chief or executive-, I've done most of it) and writing about what I learn. I've been studying/using Ruby on Rails, CSS, HTML, JavaScript, JQuery, AngularJS, mySQL, Jekyll, a little Java, d3.js, Sass, bash and a handful of other things. From what I understand, after all, a full-stack developer is never done learning new languages, frameworks, libraries, gems and whatnot, and rarely works exclusively in one. Of late, I've been learning lots of brand-new things as I go through the interview process, including knocking together something in Java that I'm proud of only because, at the beginning of those 10 intense days, I'd never written a line of Java and barely even knew where to begin.

This site recounts some of that stuff on my blog, which I have neglected diligently for a few months. It's also a project in and of itself. I've spent my non-code-challenge time, or much of it, of late, learning Jekyll and, as a result, figuring out how to use Liquid templating, yml data files and a lot more CSS and Sass than I'd done since I first started fooling around with web development tutorials in the early fall of 2015. So bits of it, [like this landing page]({{site.baseurl}}/code) serve very little purpose other than for me to practice doing something I'd seen elsewhere. Other bits, [like what happens to the title bar when you scroll up and down on blog posts]({{ site.baseurl }}/count-string-occurrence/), I like a bit more but also came up while I was working on other things. Until fairly recently, after all, I was overwhelmingly interested in the back end. An while I'm still heavily textual, that does't mean I can't practice the visual parts of design and improve a little bit. Even if mostly what I'm getting out of it is figuring out how to make X happen, that's still useful. Besides, if top-flight visual design's really important to a project, I figure you should go get a top-flight graphic designer. There's a reason why there's pros out there. Hell, I don't even trim my own beard anymore. 

But I digress. 

What I mean is, digressing is something I do, as a defining characteristic. So, you know ... be ready.  

Most of this blog will be focused on specific projects, with plenty of code samples. Those are the types of posts that have been most useful to me, so they're the kinds I'm tryna write. And I usually find that explaining my code to myself, outside of the usual trial/error/debug loop, leads me in useful directions. Since writing's a type of thinking, at least for me, it helps.

That does mean this blog is rather more likely to benefit me, but then I'm at a bit of a loss in knowing what to do to help other coders. Please reach out if you think I can help. I'd be overjoyed.

One more note: I've learned that asking dumb questions and verifying obvious things turns up solutions a lot more frequently than you'd probably assume. The posts frequently get quite long while I gnaw on stuff like this that anyone who's coded for awhile probably wouldn't need to read about. They got that knowledge from somewhere; I'm in the process of getting it. And it's usually the stuff—especially when it involves setup, or getting parts of an app to work together—that will bog me down the longest. That's why I pay attention to it.

In case you're still curious about who I am and how I got here, I bring you ...

## Work History: A Hayseed Walks Into a Korea 

I mentioned making a transition from a previous career. For my first couple of years after school, it wasn't a career at all. I held a series of jobs so I could pay my bills while I pursued what I cared about, which was writing fiction. Specifically, novels. It was what I wanted; it was never something I was sure I *should* want; still less anything that anyone at all clamors for. It still brings me something satisfying, so I plan on keeping it up. But I won't bother you much about it.

Anyway, about that "series of jobs". Things changed after a near-fatal bout of pneumonia I caught while living in Seoul, South Korea. I didn't stop wanting to write one good novel, and then another that was better, and then another that was better, and so on. But I took my work a lot more seriously.

I also got a better grasp on what I really wanted, at least in the intermediate term. I had hospital bills and other things I'd need money for, so that had to be, for awhile, a bigger priority than I'd prefer. But what had bothered me most was being judged according to the worst of the hagwon schmucks sucking about. You're partly subject to that (or you were back then) because of things that have nothing to do with what any ESL teacher in Korea does or doesn't do. You stand out from the locals, so you're an ideal target for other resentments.

I couldn't do anything about that stuff, so I focused on the other stuff: getting better at my job and avoiding the constellation of fly-by-night operations that kept the most incompetent teachers and sleaziest people employed. And saving as much as I could so that, if I never found a better fit for myself, I could leave and decide what to do next without so much financial pressure hanging over my head.

## Work History: A Job That You Could Take Places

A few months after the pneumonia aforementioned, I happened across a job opening with a small company—a startup, in fact—with plans to open TOEFL test-prep academies focused around the then-new iBT version of the test. I started writing content part-time and, six weeks later (while, in fact, I was in hospital again due to an infection I'd picked up the first time around), I was put in charge of all English-language content. Over the ensuing three-plus years, I wrote hundreds of things—tests, answers, explanations, guides, reading samples, lectures, casual conversation scripts for the voice actors. One of the first things I did (aside from spending time learning how ETS, the test's publisher, went about things) was to develop templates, best practices and workflows that made the entire process much more efficient. I could focus on researching topics and keeping a close eye on what, exactly, I was testing about (I'm no subject expert, but these tests weren't about learning the subjects; they were about using a second/foreign language in unfamiliar contexts). That meant reflecting on what I'd learned about what parts of English cause Korean speakers the most trouble—and what had made Korean difficult for me to learn. Which meant, sometimes, laying some traps. And also making sure I didn't indulge in that too much.

The company grew quickly and I soon found myself hiring freelancers to help me get my work done. That was only partly because the demand for new content kept growing. It was mostly because I'd finally worked and saved enough to get some financial breathing room. The way I looked at it, I had the chance, now, to buy back some time—for travel, for some of my own writing, for simply not spending every evening doing another 4-6 hours of work after my duties at my other job had wrapped up and then more each day on the weekends.

At the same time, I was simplifying the curriculum for use by younger students. TOEFL prep usually targets only students about to enter university who wish to study in the United States. Typically they already have a foundation in English but need more exposure to contexts they might not have encountered before. My company was expanding to serve ever-younger students, at ever-lower levels of fluency. Much of my work adapting our materials was aimed at presenting much the same content in simpler forms; the idea being that, as students moved through the curriculum, they could easily mark their own progress and understand differences in fluency.

By all accounts, the company was a hit. This was the first time I'd really contributed to something like that and it was really rewarding. But I say "by all accounts" because I never actually had an office, was hired before the first location was opened, and had decamped to Bangkok by the time it began expanding. Still, by year 4 it had grown so rapidly that the founder, who hired me out of his apartment, now had a board to answer to. The IPO approached. We began negotiating a new contract to handle a major expansion of our content needs. There was even talk of me moving back to Korea. Despite the pleasure of this job and the one I'd spent my last year doing (teaching at South Korea's answer to West Point, where they'd asked me to stay on for another contract), I'd decided to move on and doubted I'd ever be back. But I was considering it for this opportunity.

That was all scuppered when, shortly before Lehman Bros. went down in 2008, I found out that investors had forced a co-CEO on the founder and that person had decided to expand much more quickly throughout the peninsula. The company borrowed heavily to finance this. The Korean banks hit trouble a few weeks before Lehman and crucial funding was never disbursed. And that really was that. I still have a large outstanding invoice for them, and then there's that IPO, which would not have made me rich but would have given me a good start.

I was still coming to grips with that—and accepting it was over—when a friend invited me to an event she was putting on in NYC. I'd been here to take care of some other stuff when the other job went kaput. As bad as it was here in the fall of 2008, I still had better job prospects than I would have back in Bangkok, where I'd started a new life. At the event, I started chatting with the woman next to me, who mentioned she was looking for an assistant editor. I followed up and landed another part-time gig that quickly became much more.

## Work History: Having Made It Otherwhere ...

In this case, I was helping put out a magazine with a tiny but fiercely loyal and long-standing readership. It was published by a nonpartisan, albeit political, nonprofit. Until I lost my job in an expensive city in the heart of a financial meltdown, this kind of work would have been anathema to me. In this case, though, I came to love the people I was working with—and though it was political, it wasn't real big on orthodoxy. That meant there were interesting things to read and discussions to be had, and nobody really expected anybody to fit any particular culture. Rather, the culture was something that emerged from everyone else. Hell, I think half the employees thought the foundation stood for pure bunkum, but I dunno for sure.

Point being, the product didn't much matter because I liked the people and the tasks mostly ranged from tolerable to downright enjoyable. I learned how to put out 48 text-dense pages of theory with which I'd been mostly unfamiliar before. And to do so every month, on deadline, with consistent quality-control. How to discuss copyedits with sometimes-prickly professors unused to having their style scrutinized. I already knew how to spot poorly-structured arguments, gaps in logic and overly dense points, regardless of whether I knew anything about the underlying subject-matter. But I hadn't worked in print journalism since an ill-fated stint as a reporter fresh out of school (which ended when I was just too inexperienced to handle a toxic work environment) and even then, hadn't had to mess with any of the logistics of the printing.

About six weeks in, the woman who hired me suddenly passed away. With six different projects closing in on deadlines (year-end is the busy season for nonprofits), what had been a pleasant, low-pressure job suddenly got a lot more demanding, not least because my predecessor had been with the foundation for so long that she knew more about how everything worked than everyone else put together.

We pulled through and met (almost) all of our deadlines (and just barely missed with the others). After a month or so, I was offered her position (managing editor) on a permanent basis. What followed were about five years of honing the editorial process, learning how to handle RFPs and pick vendors, cutting costs and cutting them again, juggling outside copyeditors and no end of freelancers, making sure everyone got paid and hitting deadlines every month for the first time in the magazine's recent history.

It ended with two years of relative turmoil as the organization finally ramped up a rebrand and a switch to daily, web-first publication. Working with our webmaster, I handled the production side of setting up new workflows and editorial calendars to ensure we could keep publishing well-edited stuff and continue with the print component during its final wind-down without just stapling together stale printouts. I got the editorial cycle for the print version (it still had value in this context) down to a shade over two weeks from the six-to-eight-week cycle it had been on before. I wound up doing more ghostwriting, rewriting and content-hunting than ever before as a new editor was brought on. I was mainly, to use the words of my first editor there, "a black box" into which you threw content and, on the other side, got your production content.

## Work History TBD

And then I was laid off. I'd looked here and there for other positions throughout this time, but was largely happy with where I was. The work was still challenging and interesting, I liked the people I worked with, I was paid okay, and I had loads of time to write—I managed three additional drafts of the novel I'd completed between the two jobs and the first two of a (maybe too-ambitious) follow-up. There was even an abortive marketing campaign for the first when I got impatient with the agent-hunting process and tried to self-publish.

What I realized, not too long after being thrust back into the job market, was that I just didn't have the desire that seemed crucial to making a go of any of the versions of a writing career that I could see out there. The things that interested me were long-shots at best and I didn't have the financial flexibility to start churning out copy for free, which is how it's mostly done now, until I could land a gig here or there. Or I could, probably, but none of what I'd need to be writing that way ever seemed worth the effort of writing.

Wait, that's not right: I realized I'd grown stagnant and needed to do something else. Something that'd not only pose a major intellectual challenge but also give me entree into another professional world. Something that could combine both an open-ended progression in skills & challenges with a near-universal usefulness that could keep me on the move. Frankly, all of the copywriting and -editing gigs I was looking at started to look like the same spinning of wheels. I think that says more about me than about those gigs, let alone something as broad as, say, writing in general.

In fact I still like writing in general. Trying to make a living with words, like trying to promote my first novel, was sucking all the joy out of it. I'd rather keep that in my life.

So anyway, here I am on the other end of the bootcamp part of the transition. More than feeling relief or any sense of accomplishment, I'm feeling the urge to just keep getting better. Which is tricky, because finding a job is itself a lot of work and there's only so much available time. Maybe it's a function of pushing 40, but the idea of a sustainable pace (aka work-life balance) has been made very concrete to me. I struggle with where to focus my attention some days. I have wave after wave of [Impostor Syndrome](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Impostor_syndrome) washing over me. I want to make X project better and start Y and Z. I don't, if I'm being completely honest, want to blog about it—writing didn't get me where I wanted to go, why do it at the expense of coding, which might?

But then I come across something that I had to figure out by duct-taping two other StackOverflow questions together and realize that the best way to fix what I learned in my memory is to take a minute and think about it in a different context—the same way they tell you to doodle on scrap paper when you're stuck on a test. And who knows? Some day I might actually write something that's useful to someone else.

I might even understand soup.

### Disclaimers

+ There will be swears
+ Don't trust the code here. What I think is a solution normally proves insufficient shortly thereafter. I don't usually come back to fix it, though I'm tryna get better at writing a new post about it.
+ I usually hit on three wrong-right answers before I even approach a legit right answer.
+ I usually write out of frustration. I'm not this negative of a guy. But take my word for that and don't ask anyone who knows me. They're all out to get me.
